---
title: Medicaid, Medicare, and Other Government Programs
description: Medicaid, Medicare, and Other Government Programs. If you do not qualify for Medicaid does not mean there are no state funds available for you and the family
slug: Researching-Health-Insurance-Options
author: Amerus Financial
date: 19 Feb 2021
subject: medicare
position: 2
---

Medicaid is a funded government program that offers health coverage for individuals who meet certain established income and resource levels. Coverage varies by state, and under the ACA, many countries have expanded who is eligible for Medicaid. Several of the main benefits that the conditions must include are:
Basic Hospital care

- Basic physician services
- Basic laboratory and radiology services
- Basic nursing service
- Family planning services
- Special health screening for kids
- Care in nursing facilities and home-based services

States may also provide extra benefits like transportation to and from medical appointments and other physical therapy and rehabilitation services.

## Other Programs if you’re not qualified for Medicaid

If you do not qualify for Medicaid does not mean there are no state funds available for you and the family. Double-check with your state to find out what new programs it may be offering. An excellent example of one of these states and federally funded programs are the state children’s health insurance program. This system is generally for low- income families who do not have health insurance for their kids under 19. Eachstate sets the design of its program eligibility groups’ benefits packages payment levels for administration and coverage and operation procedures.

In most states, those that qualify for benefits pay little or perhaps no cost. This insurance type generally pays for doctor visits, hospitalizations, immunizations, and emergency room visits. In other states, this may cover females who are pregnant. If you do not qualify for Medicaid this year, be sure to check once again next year. Many states are expanding Medicaid programs.

### What’s Medicare, and am I eligible?

Medicare is an insurance program designed for older citizens. You do not have to meet income limits to qualify for the system. You will find two parts, Part A and Part B, other healthcare and hospital services such as outpatient doctor visits. Medicare is not just for older individuals and sixty-five. You are eligible for Medicare Part A if:

- Your spouse is getting retirement benefits from Social Security or perhaps Railroad Retirement.
- You are under sixty-five and getting Social Security Disability Insurance or perhaps Railroad Retirement disability benefits.
- You are under sixty-five years of age with end-stage renal disease, and you, as well as your spouse, have met the Medicare work requirement.

### What’s Social Security Disability Insurance?

Social Security Disability Insurance provides you with income if illness or injury prevents you from working for a prolonged period. To qualify for SSDI, you must
have completed a specific number of years. If you have never used or perhaps have not worked long enough, you might be eligible for Supplemental Security
Income instead.

This is an essential but often overlooked form of insurance. To receive benefits, you will have to get an official determination from the Social Security Administration. Figuring out in case you are eligible for disability compensation from the government could be complicated.
To make the determination process much more comfortable, you will have to have the following info.

- The date your disability started.
- Copies of your medical records and notes you or perhaps a companion made about your symptoms when you visited a doctor. It can help whether such messages are specific and include such things as the date of the physician’s stay and any treatment the doctor suggested or perhaps prescribed.
- Any notes or perhaps documents giving dates when you were ill or possibly had other health problems, mainly in case you want to miss work due to the disability of yours
- A Social Security Administration Application

Remember that you will find other possible income sources besides this insurance if you are or perhaps become disabled. Workers’ compensation provides benefits in case the illness or maybe injury is work-related. Civil service disability covers federal or perhaps state government workers: mobile auto insurance may pay benefits if the disability results from automobile accidents.

### Other choices if you do not qualify for Social Security Disability Insurance

You can buy temporary and long-term disability insurance. This is usually offered through the employer. When you are employed, you might be able to purchase these insurance types through a broker. Both insurance types are meant to help replace some fraction of your income if you cannot work because of a disability. As the title implies, short term disability insurance is designed for temporary short-term disabilities. The long-term disability is for predictably disabilities from which you will take significantly longer to recover or perhaps that are even permanent.

Most plans require a waiting period before the benefit kicks in. You will typically receive from fifty to seventy % of your typical pay. Some policies pay benefits only if you cannot perform the typical job duties, while others pay only if you cannot engage in any gainful employment. Ensure you understand the insurer’s definition of disability. Some policies pay just for accidents, but it is crucial to be insured for illness too. Make sure as you evaluate policies that both accident and sickness are covered. Benefits might be payable for a period ranging between one year to a lifetime. Since disability benefits replace income, many people do not need services beyond their working years. It is generally wise to insure yourself to at least age sixty-five since a lengthy disability threatens financial security much more when compared to a short
disability.
