---
title: When Medicare Coverage Begins
description: Identifying when your coverage begins Based on the situation, you can enroll in Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B
slug: When-Medicare-Coverage-Begins
author: Amerus Financial
date: 22 Jan 2021
subject: medicare
position: 2
---

Identifying when your coverage begins can affect several of the decisions you make about enrolling. Based on the situation, you can enroll in Part A and Part B during any of the next time frames:

- During your seven-month initial enrollment period, the middle month is the one when you reach age sixty-five or become eligible for Medicare based on disability.
- During an eight-month particular period granted after you or perhaps your spouse stops working for an employer that has provided coverage you received beyond age sixty-five.
- During a three month general enrollment period which runs from January 1st to March 31st each year which you use only in case you miss the deadline for your SEP or IEP

## The very first three months of your IEP

The middle month of your IEP is almost always the month in which you turn sixty-five. Should you sign up for Parts A and B during any of the first three months of your IEP, your coverage begins quickly on the first day of the month in which you turn sixty-five, regardless of how far into the month your birthday falls.

## Medicare coverage awarded retroactively.

In case you’re under sixty-five and apply for Social Security disability benefits, you’d generally have to wait twenty-four months before becoming entitled to
Medicare. What happens if you are granted Medicare coverage retroactively? This could happen whether your appeal for disability benefits takes a very long time to achieve success. If so, you’ve two options:

- You can accept Medicare coverage retroactively and use it to keep for Medicare-covered services you have already received and paid for out of pocket. Nevertheless, you should also pay Part B premiums back when Social Security deems you were first eligible for Medicare.
- You can decline Part B backdated coverage that you have been offered, in which case you won’t have to pay Part B premiums retroactively.

## Obamacare to Medicare

Millions of folks have received health insurance through the online Marketplace set up under the Affordable Care Act in 2014. And thousands of them turn sixty-five every day. If you are in this particular scenario, you might be asking yourself when and how you can transition from one to the other, even whether you need to.

## Whether you need to make the switch

Not doing something often feels much easier than taking action. Nevertheless, it will help if you still weighed the advantages and disadvantages of switching to Medicare versus staying with the Marketplace so that the decision you make is informed and takes account of the consequences.

## Must I switch to Medicare?

The laws allow you to keep your plan if you like, but there are reasons you should not. You’ll no longer qualify for any subsidies, or perhaps tax credits that reduce your Marketplace premiums, and paying the full amount will cost a great deal more than Medicare. Unless your Marketplace plan comes from an employer, delaying signing up for Medicare beyond age sixty-five makes you liable for a gap in coverage and late penalties, which would be permanently added to your Medicare premiums.

## Insurance bought through SHOP.

It depends on the amount of employees your employer has and what the employer’s insurance company requires. The Small Business Health Options Program, which makes it possible for small businesses to get health insurance for their workers through the Marketplace, defines a small employer as having fifty or perhaps fewer employees. But under Medicare rules, a small employer is one that has under twenty employees. Therefore, the following restrictions apply:

- Suppose your employer has twenty or more employees. If so, you have the right to continue receiving the employer insurance and delay Medicare enrollment until you stop work without risking any late penalties.
- If your employer has under twenty employees, you have to determine whether the employer’s insurance is secondary or primary to Medicare.

## Lacking enough work credits for premium-free Medicare Part A

You can remain on your Marketplace plan until You’ve earned enough. With this scenario, you can decide to keep your Marketplace plan or enroll in one for the first time rather than registering for any part of Medicare. You are also entitled to retain some government subsidies you have been receiving to lower your marketplace premiums. Staying in a Marketplace plan can save you from paying relatively high premiums on Part A benefits alone. However, you have to compare every system’s full price to see which one is probably the least expensive for you.

## You have Part A but missed the deadline for Part B sign up. Are you able to enroll in a Marketplace plan until Medicare Part B kicks in?

The answer is actually No. under Medicare rules, you risk a gap in late penalties and coverage if you don’t sign up for Part B when you need to. But under Medicare rules, you risk a gap coverage and late penalties if you don’t sign up for Part B when you need to. But under Marketplace rules, anybody who’s premium-free Part A on its own is considered to have qualifying health coverage, which protects individuals from having to pay Marketplace penalties for noncoverage. The rules also insist that insurance companies cannot sell a Marketplace plan to any person who has enrolled in any Medicare aspect, which would violate the law, which protects consumers from sold insurance that would duplicate Medicare benefits.
