---
title: Why Use A Health Insurance Agent
description: Health Insurance Agent With the introduction of the Health Insurance Exchanges there has been drastic changes in the way that consumers obtain Health Insurance.
slug: Why-Use-A-Health-Insurance-Agent
author: Amerus Financial
date: 3 Apr 2020
subject: HealthInsurance
position: 1
---

With the introduction of the Health Insurance Exchanges there has been drastic changes in the way that consumers obtain Health Insurance Coverage. I get questioned continually as to why someone would use an Health Insurance Agent instead of simply going onto Healthcare.gov and getting Health Insurance themselves.
Here are four reasons why you should consult an agent instead of going onto the Health Insurance Exchange yourselves.

## 1-Expertise

If you use a licensed Insurance Agent to assist you in getting your Health Insurance Coverage, you are speaking to someone who has taken the time to obtain a license and study the various ins and outs of Health Insurance and should have the ability to answer any questions that you may have concerning things like benefits, deductibles, co-pays, eligibility, subsidies, and a host of other questions and concerns that may arise in the enrollment process.

## 2-Help in Qualifying for Tax Credit’s & Subsidies

There is so much confusion surrounding Tax Credits and Subsidies that many people we speak to everyday have no idea how to qualify for tax credits that help them pay the monthly premiums on their Health Insurance.
A Tax Credit is a direct payment from the federal government to the insurance company to help pay for your monthly Health Insurance premium. This payment is determined by your Modified Adjusted Gross Income and can pay up to 100% of your monthly premium.
A Subsidy is also paid directly to the insurance company on behalf of those that make less than 200% of the federal poverty level. This subsidy helps reduce out of pocket expenses like deductibles, co-insurance, co-pays etc…
Your licensed agent can help you navigate the qualification process and instruct you on how to maximize your tax credit and help you qualify for a subsidy.

## 3-Customer Service

One of the most important reasons to use a licensed insurance agent is having the ability to pick up the phone and talk to your agent anytime there is a problem that arises. You can rest assure that no one at healthcare.gov is going to take the time to talk to that doctor that is having trouble getting paid or the insurance company that is not processing the claim correctly. Having an agent that goes the extra mile to keep your business can save you hours of headaches and frustration.

## 4-No Additional Cost

This last reason that I am going to point out is a real no brainer. The fact is it does not cost you one dollar more to use a licensed insurance professional to help you navigate the marketplace and qualify for Health Insurance Coverage. In fact it could literally save you hundreds of dollars per year as our clients attest.
Remember when you are getting frustrated and and ready to pull your hair out trying to get Health Insurance Coverage give your local Health Insurance Professional a call and let them guide you through the process. You will be glad you did.

## Author Timothy Baggett

Timothy Baggett is a licensed Insurance Agent in the state of Florida and has been helping Floridians obtain insurance coverage for over 20 years. He is the owner of Amerus Financial Group in Lakeland Florida and serves the Lakeland, Orlando, and Tampa Bay Area. Amerus Financial Group is licensed to do business in over 13 states and has several thousand clients throughout the U.S.
